# _Code Name: MIFMR_
# Maternal, Infant, and Fetal Mortality Rate
## Jonathan H. Ortiz-Candelaria (jhoc@uw.edu), JP Lopez (jlopez19@uw.edu), Aronia McLean (aroniam@uw.edu)  
## INFO-201: Technical Foundations of Informatics - The Information School - University of Washington
## Autumn 2022

### Abstract
Our main question is _how do maternal, infant, and fetal mortality rates differ among different geographic regions across the US and across the world_. To address the question, we will obtain data revealing maternal, infant, and fetal mortality trends relating to the rates at which they occur and which populations/geographic regions they primarily affect. We are concerned with the issue of these mortality trends because data relating to the issue has the potential to highlight health inequities that must be addressed.

### Keywords
_maternal mortality; infant mortality; fetal mortality; childbirth; healthcare_

### Introduction
The CDC defines maternal mortality as the death of a woman during pregnancy, at delivery, or shortly following delivery, infant mortality as the death of an infant before his or her first birthday, and fetal mortality as the spontaneous death of a fetus at any time during pregnancy. The corresponding trends for all three of these categories have varied a lot through time and while they have for the most part improved, it is still a big issue within underdeveloped countries, low-income communities, and places where there is lack of access to important resources such as food and water. This pattern of lower-income communities experiencing higher maternal, infant, and fetal rates is one our project seeks to explore. Our goal is to further understand what ares are more likely to experience significantly higher mortality rates. Additionally, in doing so, we will be able to explore to what extent geographical location impacts these different mortality rates. With these explorations in mind, our project will look at different patterns of discrimination occurring across geographical locations. 

### Problem Domain
- Project Framing: In 2017, the World Health Organization (WHO) reported that the United States was one of only two countries to report a significant increase in maternal mortality ratio since 2000. Since the WHO report was released, U.S. maternal mortality rates have leveled in recent years, but the ratio remains significantly higher than in other “developed” countries. Through this project, we will highlight and analyze data similar to what has been highlighted by the WHO report on maternal mortality and the prevalence at which it occurs. More specifically, our project will focus on how the pervelance of maternal mortality directly correlates with social determinants such as race, ethnicity, and geographic location. Several studies indicate that social factors, specifically race, play a detrimental role in maternal mortality. Black women in the U.S. have a significantly higher risk of experiencing maternal mortality. Therefore, the aim of the project is to highlight and address the health inequity of maternal mortality and its disproportionate impacts.  

- Human Values: Equity, Health, Accountability, Responsibility, Integrity

- Direct and Indirect Stakeholders: Direct stakeholders for this project could include researchers collecting data on the prevalence of maternal, infant, and fetal mortality and how it correlates with social factors such as race and geographic location. Once our project is completed, the data and information we collect will become accessible to anyone seeking information on the research topic. Indirect stakeholders of the project will include women who have been or will be impacted by maternal, infant, or fetal mortality, more specifically Black women as this population is most impacted by the issue. Since maternal mortality can affect almost any woman during childbirth, more often Black women, the data we collect has the potential to highlight the issue and impact decision making on various levels such as on a policy level.

- Possible Harms: A possible harm that could arise from the project could be the invasion of privacy through the utilization of potentially sensitive data and information. Much of the data that will be collected for our project will be related to death, specifically in the context of maternal mortality. The topic and data collected may be sensitive to populations that these mortality rates primarily affect. Even more, it is possible that hospitals store and collect data pertaining to these mortalities without the full consent of patients or their families. Therefore, the information also becomes a sensitive topic for the families of those who have passed from maternal, infant, and fetal mortality as it is possible that the information and data of their family member is being used.  

- Possible Benefits: The project will highlight an important issue relating to health equity. By gathering data pertaining to maternal mortality, infant mortality, fetal mortality, and the disparities they create, our project has the potential to push for action that addresses and seeks solutions for maternal mortality.  

- Citations:
  - Declercq, E., &amp; Zephyrin, L. (n.d.). Maternal in the United States - Commonwealth Fund. Retrieved October 31, 2022, from https://www.commonwealthfund.org/sites/default/files/2020-12/Declercq_maternal_mortality_primer_db.pdf
  - Wang, E., Glazer, K. B., Howell, E. A., &amp; Janevic, T. M. (2020, April). Social determinants of pregnancy-related mortality and morbidity in the United States: A systematic review. Obstetrics and gynecology. Retrieved October 31, 2022, from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7104722/
  - Douthard, R., Martin, I., Chapple-Mcgrudder, T., Langer, A., &amp; Chang, S. (2022, February 2). U.S. maternal mortality within a global context: Historical trends ... Mary Anne Liebert, Inc Publishers. Retrieved October 31, 2022, from https://www.liebertpub.com/doi/full/10.1089/jwh.2020.8863

### Research Questions
- How do maternal mortality rates differ across the world?  

   - This question is important because it is the backbone of our research exploration. There is a fair amount of variation across country lines from system of governance to population density that may potentially impact how we understand the issue of maternal mortality. When trying to understand the severity of maternal mortality, it's important to understand the concentration of maternal mortality across different geographical locations.  


- How do infant and fetal mortality rates differ across county and state lines?

  - Healthcare is an area that often under serves minorities, exposing them to unsafe or neglectful healthcare conditions. Similar to the question above, understanding how geographical location plays a role in maternal, infant, and fetal mortality provides a more complete picture. It allows us to understand the varying prevalence of the issue amongst different women. 


- What do geographical patterns reveal about maternal, infant, and fetal mortality inequity?

  - It’s important to consider the components of a given location in terms of population, political leaning, etc. To understand why we’re seeing higher levels of these mortalities in certain areas, it may help to consider these other variables. This will potentially further strengthen our argument of racial and class issues as the explanatory variable behind these high mortality rates.  

### The Dataset
- These datasets will help us with the goal of answering all three research questions and addressing certain aspects presented in the problem domain. For the first research question, the second dataset will be used since this is its primary function. For the second question, the second and third datasets will be used. They provide statistics on infant and fetal deaths across the US and more specifically in Washington State. For the third question, we will infer from everything we do in the project. This third question will specifically be answered with the help of visualizations we create and our interpretations of them.

|Dataset                      |Number of Observations (Rows)|Number of Variables (Columns)|
|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|
|maternalMortalityRatio.csv   |3295                         |3                            |
|wastate_fetaldeaths.csv      |1241                         |16                           |
|im_state_table.csv           |400                          |5                            |    

- URL:
  - maternalMortalityRatio.csv _(Global)_ - https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/utkarshxy/who-worldhealth-statistics-2020-complete
  - wastate_fetaldeaths.csv _(Washington only)_ - https://doh.wa.gov/data-and-statistical-reports/washington-tracking-network-wtn/fetal-and-infant-death-data/fetal-infant-deaths-county 
  - im_state_table.csv _(US only)_ - https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/pressroom/sosmap/infant_mortality_rates/infant_mortality.htm

- The first dataset is taken from Kaggle by a user who had sourced it originally from the World Health Organization. This includes data from the year 2000 to 2017 for the purpose of making a plan to reduce the amount of preventable maternal mortalities. This project was funded by the World Health Organization for the benefit of research and countries all around the world. Due to this, we can determine that the source is credible and is updated on a fairly frequent term. The second dataset is taken from the Washington State Department of Health. The goal of this agency is to both protect and improve the health of people living in Washington State. This agency provides reliable information regarding health issues such as health statistics, environmental health, diseases, etc. The third dataset is taken from the CDC’s National Center for Health Statistics website. It is sourced from the WONDER Online Database for the purpose of studying infant mortality rates and making them easily accessible to others. Its mission being to make information resources from the CDC publicly available. This dataset is funded by the CDC and in turn the US government for this purpose; meaning that they are the ones who benefit the most from it and are trustworthy.

### Expected Implications
The ultimate goal of this project is to highlight maternal mortality as an issue that is exacerbated by social factors such as race. Therefore, the expected implication of the project will be an overall better understanding of how maternal mortality rates differ among populations in different geographic regions. This will hopefully highlight health inequity and educate people on the pressing issue that is maternal mortality. Ideally, we also hope that the data we collect pushes professionals that that are bettered positioned to properly address the issue. This will include policy makers that make decisions regarding factors that influence maternal mortality and physicians that perform birthing surgical procedures.  

### Limitations
Potential limitations we may need to address would be differing reporting inconsistencies across state lines. Different states may have stronger or weaker reports of maternal mortality based on the strength of their healthcare services. Additionally, if a state does strengthen their reporting of healthcare, it is possible that it is not necessarily the case that that state is now experiencing higher rates of maternal mortality but rather that their actual accounting of the instances of maternal mortality has improved. This would make it seem that they’re experiencing more maternal mortality but in reality, their reporting has just improved. Another potential limitation is looking at age and how that potentially plays a factor in maternal mortality rates. Currently, our research questions do not address age but as women get older, there are increased risks associated with pregnancy. If the data we collect shows a correlation between older women representing most maternal mortality rates, that will also be something we need to address to have a comprehensive understanding of our data.   

### Findings
With the research, graphs, and inferences from these we have been able to do, we are able to answer our research questions. First off, how do maternal mortality rates differ across the world? The map and line graph in the maternal mortality tab answer this question. Every country seems to differ highly in their rates and trends. While most countries’ rate has seemed to decreased through the years, some still maintain high enough rates for this topic to be an issue. There is also the problem of some countries actually having increases in their rates over the last few years. The US being an example of this, with its maternal mortality rate going up to 19 in 2017. While this might not be a lot, a highly developed and huge country to have increasing numbers like this is an issue. Some of the higher rates tend to come from more underdeveloped countries, which is pretty understandable. These are more specifically spread around Africa and seem to be due to their lack of medical resources. Second, how do infant and fetal mortality rates differ across county and state lines? This one is answered with the graphs in both the infant and fetal mortality rates tabs. These mortality rates, instead of dropping, seem to vary a lot from year to year. One year they decrease, the next they increase; there isn’t a particular pattern to these trends. What is most noticeable is that there are larger rates in places where the wage gaps are bigger. In other words, places like King County in Washington State will have higher rates than those of Snohomish due to the differences in population and their income levels. Across state lines, it seems to be that infant mortality rates are fairly proportional to the population of a state. In other words, states with more people tend to have higher rates. The states that seem to have very high infant mortalities across the years seem to be California, Texas, and Florida. Keep in mind, these states do have high populations and also have high poverty rates. They are also more culturally diverse which means they usually fall into poverty due to lack of government help, unfortunately, making infant mortality rates fairly high. With this, we have answered all three questions that we were meant to answer and has led us to think as to why these answers are this way.

### Discussion
With these results, we have been able to infer and analyze a lot of aspects of these different mortality rates across the US and world. Specifically, the answers to our research questions lead us to think about what are the specific causes of these different rates. While the direct reasons why these deaths happen are straightforward and hard to solve such as birth defects, preterm births, overall maternal complications, etc. The more indirect reasons that usually lead to these direct reasons are solvable. These indirect reasons being problems with lack of healthcare, clean food, clean water, safe shelter, safe abortions, education, economic stability, and many more. One of the main issues relating to these is that the people that experience these indirect issues tend to be mostly minorities. It’s the systematic racism embedded in our society that leads infants born to black women to die at over twice the rate that infants born to white women do. Minorities are at a bigger risk of experiencing maternal, infant, and fetal mortality due to these social issues that still play a big role today. While maternal, infant, and fetal mortality rates have been decreasing, for the most part, through the years, they still occur at alarming rates. Even more alarming when you look at countries whose rates are actually increasing somehow. You’d think countries would start paying attention to social conditions for their citizens to improve their quality of life, yet they don’t do as much as they should. As the years pass, medical technology gets more advanced, and these mortalities should theoretically start decreasing. Yet, if the access to that medical technology is limited, these rates aren’t going to change any time soon. People need access to healthcare for their well-being, which makes it not providing or sharing it with other people due to their race or place of origin deadly. Maternal, infant, and fetal mortality rates aren’t the only issues that get affected by these social problems. There are many more issues that would be solved if governments would start restructuring societies in a way where minorities aren’t taken advantage of and just used. If instead, they were treated as humans like everyone else, change would happen, and society could advance together faster for a better future. At the end of the day, it is hard to implement large scale change, yet this is why one must advocate for small changes along the way that will hopefully lead to widespread change improving the quality of life for all. 

### Conclusion
In conclusion, this project has looked at maternal, infant, and fetal rates throughout various places from around the world to more specifically in the US. These rates differ in many different ways across county, state lines, and country lines. When it comes to county lines, we see these differences appear from more rural counties to more urban counties. The more urban counties having more deaths due to the higher population and higher diversity. When it comes to state lines, we see similar differences appearing. States with higher populations and diversity tend to have more deaths than those that oppose them. States like these also tend to have more impoverished communities which contributes to higher mortality rates. When it comes to country lines though, it tends to differ a lot more. This is because each country has its own government structure and culture. Some countries are more developed than others, have better access to resources than others, and are socially different. Across country lines we saw that countries in Africa tend to have the highest maternal, infant, and fetal mortality rates even though trends point to their numbers decreasing as time passes. While globally these rates have been decreasing as a whole, some countries haven’t had straight decreases. Trends really just vary from country to country dramatically. This then brings up the social implications of the project and the reasonings behind all of these results. With our inferences and analysis, we have noticed that there are a few main issues affecting these rates. The main one being systematic racism which then leads to lack of resources such as medical care, education, safe food, clean water, safe abortions, etc. To solve these, broad and extensive change must occur all throughout the world which is very hard to do. One must advocate for small changes to occur locally, and, over time, these changes will hopefully be implemented on a grander scale. At the end of the day, this problem affects everyone. The topic of birth is one that obviously affects everyone; therefore, change must happen. One important factor to remember though is that it affects minorities the most. Why? Because they are the ones that lack the most resources which causes their mortality rates to be a lot higher than others.

### Acknowledgements
Thank you to our professor Thomas Winegarden and our Teacher Assistant Lillia Chebbi for the help throughout the project.

### References
- Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022, September 16). Maternal mortality. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Retrieved October 30, 2022, from https://www.cdc.gov/reproductivehealth/maternal-mortality/index.html

- Hoyert, D. L. (2020). Maternal mortality rates in the United States, 2020. Maternal Mortality Rates in the United States, 2020. Retrieved October 30, 2022, from https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/113967

- Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022, June 22). Infant mortality. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Retrieved December 4, 2022, from https://www.cdc.gov/reproductivehealth/maternalinfanthealth/infantmortality.htm#:~:text=Infant%20mortality%20is%20the%20death,for%20every%201%2C000%20live%20births. 

- Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022, October 18). NVSS - fetal deaths. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Retrieved December 4, 2022, from https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nvss/fetal_death.htm#:~:text=Fetal%20death%20refers%20to%20the,sometimes%20referred%20to%20as%20stillbirths
